
This book follows the story of Anina, a young Badjao girl who lives her life by the sea with her parents and two siblings. She narrates everything that she goes through, shares her thoughts, and proclaims her love for the waters she calls home.  
  
In the early chapters, Anina talks about the ins and outs of Badjao life and culture. For those who are unfamiliar, the Badjao is one name referring to an ethnic group who live in the southernmost islands of the Philippines (primarily Tawi-Tawi) and other neighboring areas (like Borneo or a number of Indonesian islands). Some people may know them by the moniker "sea nomads", which refers to their seaborne lifestyle.  
  
Though Anina does not provide an exhaustive account of everything there is to know about Badjao culture, she manages to talk about a number of topics, such as their reverence for the sea (extending to a belief that there are deities who govern them), gender roles (men being primarily fishermen and women focusing more on taking care of children, preparing food, and collecting crabs or seashells), various boats and their purposes (like the lepa, which is like a house-boat), and even rituals for mourning the dead. The Social Studies curriculum in my school (can't speak for other schools) didn't really do a lot to teach us about the Badjao (or any other Filipino indigenous group, for that matter), and this short book was able to do what ten years of formal education apparently couldn't. There really needs to be a discussion on how we educate children about other indigenous groups...  
  
Many aspects of the Badjao's culture fascinated me, such as their innate skill for swimming, diving, and navigating the seas, the prevalence of indigenous instruments such as the kulintang (which, fun fact: I actually knew how to play at some point in my life), and the fact that dream weavers (women who weave cloth with designs inspired by their dreams) also existed in this culture. What stands out to me the most is their clear respect for nature, as not only do they deify it, but they take care not to be destructive in their practices (e.g. no harming sea turtles). Anina herself expresses this love well, as she is often waxing poetic about the seas and how essential it is to her identity.  
  
It's not all calm waters for Anina, however, as events transpire that show her that life isn't as idllyic as she thinks it is. Early on, she goes to school (something she expressed interest in doing) and was met with discrimination from her classmates. Anina realizes how completely different everyone else is from the Badjao, and she finds herself wishing that those others could understand what the sea has to offer.  
  
Later on, outsiders in modern fishing vessels arrive in Badjao waters, threatening the livelihood of the Badjao fishermen as they take away fish and destroy the reef in the process. In desperation, the Badjao fishermen are forced to use dynamite themselves just so that they can get enough to survive. The whole "capitalism and nature do not mix" themes are clear, and describing it in terms of the Badjao (who rely on nature being the way it is to survive) conveys that point well.  
  
The situation escalates further as the turmoil in Mindanao (a serious issue that's persisted since before I was alive) reaches Badjao waters, and they are caught between a war between terrorists and the military. A combination of the increasingly unsafe conditions and a personal tragedy forces Anina's family to escape to Manila, where, like many people from the province who make their way here, they struggle to survive in poverty. This is all stuff I'm already somewhat aware of, but it is completely sobering to hear all of this from the perspective of a little girl. It really makes one realize how poorly these indigenous groups are treated: they're forced out of their homes (either by military occupation or capitalistic ventures), only to move to the cities where no one gives a shit about them and they're left to fend for themselves in the streets.  
  
Anina's perspective on Manila is also cause for reflection, especially for someone like me, who has lived most of their life in the region. She remarks on how completely removed the place is from nature, and how the seas here (I assume she means Manila Bay) feel dead compared to the waters she called home (which is not completely wrong). I already like the outdoors, and I'm already trying to be more environmentally-conscious because of climate change, but seeing the place I live in through the eyes of someone who made her home in nature was quite effective in showing me that there's something amiss with this overly urban jungle.  
  
In terms of characters, Anina is obviously the most prominent one. It's through her that the reader learns about the Badjao, and we see the events that transpire through her lens. None of the other characters get as much to say and do, but how Anina views those characters in relation to herself is just as insightful. For example, Anina's father is mostly focused on being a fisherman and not much else, but you can tell that Anina holds him in high regard with how enthusiastic she talks about fishing.  
  
The book is pretty short, but it moves pretty quickly. Every chapter is a somewhat significant jump in time, but it doesn't feel too jarring, and although the span of time is rarely stated explicitly (if at all), I could still infer how long it was between events.  
  
Interspersed in some chapters are poems, many of which are implied to be the songs Anina sings to herself as events transpire. These songs describe what Anina is feeling or thinking in truly poetic fashion, and I occasionally found them to be more effective at revealing Anina's thoughts and emotions than the regular narration. The ones where she describes the seas she calls home are patrticularly impressive to me, as the language evokes a vivid mental image of scenic waters, reefs teeming with life, and even starry skies.  

## VERDICT:  
  
Anina ng mga Alon is a short, but potent book that gives readers an extensive look at the life of the Badjao. Through Anina's words and songs, I learned a whole lot about Badjao culture, further understood the effects of outside intervention on indigenous people, and acquired a rekindled apprecation for the sea and marine life. This book is less than 100 pages long and it managed to get all that out of me. I'm quite impressed.  
  
I highly recommend this book for any Filipino reader, especially ones like me who spent most of their life in Manila. It's a great way to learn about a group of people that you may not fully understand, and perhaps learning about them will help you empathize with their plight. The only barrier I really see is that the book is entirely in Filipino, and this may pose a challenge to people whose bilingual nature leans more towards English (I know lots of people like that, and to an extent, I'm one of them). Other than that, you should absolutely read this.